A kinetic Monte Carlo approachfor Boolean logic functionality ingold nanoparticle networks
Jonas Mensing1, Wilfred G. van der Wiel2,3 and Andreas Heuer1*
1Theory of Complex Systems Group, Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Münster, Münster,Germany, 2NanoElectronics Group, MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, Center for Brain-InspiredNano Systems (BRAINS), University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands, 3Institute of Physics, Unversity ofMünster, Münster, Germany
Nanoparticles interconnected by insulating organic molecules exhibit nonlinearswitching behavior at low temperatures. By assembling these switches into anetwork and manipulating charge transport dynamics through surroundingelectrodes, the network can be reconﬁgurably functionalized to act as anyBoolean logic gate. This work introduces a kinetic Monte Carlo-basedsimulation tool, applying established principles of single electronics to modelchargetransportdynamicsinnanoparticlenetworks.Wefunctionalizenanoparticle networks as Boolean logic gates and assess their quality using aﬁtness function. Based on the deﬁnition of ﬁtness, we derive new metrics toquantify essential nonlinear properties of the network, including negativedifferential resistance and nonlinear separability. These nonlinear propertiesare crucial not only for functionalizing the network as Boolean logic gates butalso when our networks are functionalized for brain-inspired computingapplications in the future. We address fundamental questions about thedependence of ﬁtness and nonlinear properties on system size, number ofsurrounding electrodes, and electrode positioning. We assert the overallbeneﬁt of having more electrodes, with proximity to the network’s outputbeing pivotal for functionality and nonlinearity. Additionally, we demonstratean optimal system size and argue for breaking symmetry in electrode positioningto favor nonlinear properties.
KEYWORDS
kinetic Monte Carlo, brain-inspired computing, neuromorphic computing, simulation,nanoparticle networks, negative differential resistance, nonlinear system, singleelectronics

        1 Introduction

Brain-inspired computing represents an approach to advancing computation inmachine learning applications by emulating the information processing of biologicalneural networks (Schuman et al., 2017). Compared to von-Neumann computing, itleverages massively parallel operation without separating memory and processing(Schuman et al., 2022). The implementation of these brain-like infrastructures aimto overcome limitations of traditional hardware and ultimately reduce energyconsumptionofcurrentmachinelearningapplications(Markov,2014; Nakajima, 2020).Nanoparticle (NP) networks as one example of physical systems (Dale et al., 2021; Milano et al., 2023) offer a promising avenue in this ﬁeld. One current approach uses
percolating scale-free NP networks with small-world properties(Fostner and Brown, 2015; Bose et al., 2017; 2019; Daniels et al.,2023; Mallinson et al., 2023). The intrinsic architecture of thesenetworks includes conductivity dynamics which are crucial forcomputational tasks (Deng and Zhang, 2007; Kawai et al., 2019).Tunnel gaps forming between adjacent areas or clusters ofnanoparticles act as nonlinear units or memristors, with theirresistanceexhibitingnonlinearresponsestoalterationsinconductance. While the origin of the nonlinearity here arisesfrom the connections of large clusters of NPs and not theparticles themselves (Daniels et al., 2023), our approach is different.Our research in this domain centers on single electronics within goldNP networks (Likharev, 1999; Durrani, 2003). Each NP serves as aconductive island, tunnel-coupled with its neighboring NP by aninsulating organic molecule. When a NP is charged, its excesscharges can tunnel to an adjacent NP only when the potentialdifference between them surpasses the repelling force exerted by theCoulomb energy. This Coulomb blockade effect imbues the chargetunneling dynamics in between NPs with a nonlinear activationfunction (van der Wiel et al., 2002).The network is surrounded by electrodes, which serve as networkinputs, outputs or controls (see Figure 1). The latter manipulate thenetwork’s potential landscape and its charge tunneling dynamics,enabling the mapping of various functionalities to the input andoutput electrodes. Previous research has demonstrated the network’sinput to output dependence to reconﬁgurably function as any type ofBoolean logic gate when applying suitable control electrode voltages (Boseet al., 2015; Greff et al., 2016). Figure 1 shows a circuit diagram of a smallNP network and electrode setup.
The integration of theoretical frameworks and simulationmethods is of key importance in order to enable a closerunderstanding and subsequent optimization of these systems. Inthis paper, we use a kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) approach tosimulate electronic charge tunneling dynamics within the NPnetwork.Priorresearchhasalreadydemonstratedtheeffectiveness of the KMC approach for studying single electronicsdevices (Kirihara et al., 1994; Wasshuber et al., 1997; Lee et al., 2008;Elabd et al., 2012). In particular, Van Damme et al. (van Dammeet al., 2016) conﬁgured small networks of 16 nanoparticles to act asany Boolean logic gate. Although also smaller networks of just singleNPs combined with electrostatic gates already show complexbehavior such as XOR dependence for single realizations ofvoltages Yutaka Majima et al. (2017), our work extend theseprevious analyses by a comprehensive statistical investigation inseveral directions. First, it addresses the inﬂuence of system size(number of NPs) as well as the number and location of electrodes tooptimize the chance to observe Boolean logic functionality. Thisinformation is relevant for the future design of such NP networks.Second,fromamethodologicalperspectiveweintroducequantitative indicators for negative differential resistance andnonlinear separability. These nonlinear properties are imperativefor a broad spectrum of brain-inspired computing (Yi et al., 2018)and machine learning applications (Elizondo, 2006). Here, weexplicitly show that these indicators are quantitatively related tothe ability of the network to display Boolean logic functionality.Third, due to the availability of fast array-based computations wehighlight the efﬁciency of the implementation of the KMC approach.

        2 Theory and methods


            2.1 Nanoparticle networks

In this section, we ﬁrst describe some fundamentals of the NPnetwork design of (Bose et al., 2015) which served as a starting pointfor our work on this simulation tool. We then go through theelectrostatic properties of the network and describe the dynamics ofsingle-electron tunneling.

                2.1.1 ElectrostaticsThe system of (Bose et al., 2015) consists of about 100 single AuNPs (20 nm diameter) which are interconnected by 1-octanethiolsas an insulating organic molecule. The network is placed on a highlydoped Si substrate with an insulting SiO2 top-layer and issurrounded by 8 Ti/Au electrodes.From an electrostatic point of view, we just speak of a network ofconductive islands interconnected by resistors and capacitors inparallel. Electrodes are understood as voltage sources UE. Figure 1shows a circuit diagram of a 9-NP network in a regular grid-likeconnection topology.We derive the capacitance values of the network using the imagecharge method (see Supplementary Section S1). The capacitance Cijbetween island i and j depends on the NP radii ri, rj, the distancebetween both NPs dij and the permittivity of the insulating materialϵm. The self capacitance Ci,self for the isolated island i close to theSiO2 layer depends on its radius ri and the permittivity of theinsulating environment ϵSiO2. Even though the simulation tool

allows to setup variable radii or distances, for this work values are setconstant with r = 10 nm and d = 1 nm, respectively, following (Boseet al., 2015).For a given connection topology, we deﬁne the capacitancematrix C where diagonal components (C)ii represent the sum of allcapacitance values attached to NP i and its self capacitance, whileoff-diagonal components (C)ij represent the cross capacitance inbetween NP i and j. In this work, we will not cover the impact ofhaving variable connection topologies. Therefore, for all results wealign NP in a regular grid like two-dimensional topology, such as inFigure 1, to isolate the upcoming results from additional disordereffects. Although we measure deviations in our system from theexperiment due to the absence of disorder, still the overall statisticaltrendsremainconsistent(seeSupplementarySectionS4).Furthermore, the general statistical concepts to characterize non-linear behavior in the present type of systems are sufﬁciently generalto be applied to the disordered case as well. Finally, it should bestressed that due to the generally different choice of control voltages,theoverallsystemisnotfullysymmetricevenforasymmetric network.

                2.1.2 Single-electron tunnelingThe network consists of conductive NPs interconnected byinsulating molecules. The insulating molecules serve as tunnelbarriers and functionalize the network. Excess charges residingon NP i tunnel to an adjacent NP j if their associated potentialϕi exceeds the repelling force resulting from the Coulomb energyEC,j e2(C)jj of NP j. For a NP with four next neighbors at maximumwe ﬁnd a charging energy of about E ≈16 meV. This behavior leadsto a switch-like nonlinear activation function for the chargetunneling dynamics where charges may or may not tunnel totheir nearest neighbors corresponding to the current network’spotential landscape.We deﬁne the network state ⃗q(t) as the number of excess chargesresiding on each NP at a given time step. Then, the network’spotential landscape is calculated as

with C−1 as the inverse of the capacitance matrix. The internalelectrostatic energy is described as
When voltages are applied to the surrounding electrodes, chargeseither enter the network or getting drained from it. The Helmholtzfree energy determines the tunneling process and consists of thedifference of total energy stored inside the network E and work Wdone by external electrodes
In its current state, the network will enter its next state associated toa change in free energy, either by a charge tunneling event from NP ito j
or by a charge tunneling event from NP i to electrode E
with elementary charge e. The change in free energy caused by atunnel event serves as a measure of probability for this speciﬁc eventwith tunnel rate
where Rij denotes the resistance for jump path i →j and T thenetwork’s temperature. If we apply constant voltages to all electrodesand execute around 10,000 charge tunneling events, the network willeventually settle in an equilibrium with constant electric currentsentering or exiting the system via the electrodes. In this work we willnot distinguish between charge tunneling events in betweennanoparticles or in between nanoparticles and electrodes exceptfor the above difference in free energy. We argue that this is a fairapproximation, as also in the experimental situation the tunnelbarrier with the electrodes is formed by an insulating layerof molecules.We revisit Eq. 6 and see that increasing the network’stemperature T leads to drastically larger rates. Then, differencesin the potential landscape are negligible and thermal excitation willbe the dominant factor for the charge tunneling through thenetwork. Overall, the device looses its functionality due to thelinearization of the charge tunneling dynamics, i.e., its nonlinearactivation functions (see Supplementary Section S2; SupplementaryFigure S2). Therefore, we have to choose the temperature, so thatcondition EC > kBT is true. In this work we will stick to a temperaturevalue of T = 0.28 K as in (Bose et al., 2015) which easily satisﬁes thelatter condition with kBT ≈2.5 · 10–2 meV much smaller than themaximum charging energy of E ≈16 meV.Additionally we also want to neglect coherent quantumprocesses, i.e., co-tunneling. For this we have to choose thetunneling resistance Rij in between NPs to be much higher thanthe quantum resistance of Rt  he2 ≈25.8 kΩ. In our simulations weset the tunneling resistance for all tunneling processes to a constantvalue of R = 25 MΩ, which is sufﬁcient to assume charges to beconﬁned on our NP islands.

            2.2 Modelling and simulation

Based on the ﬁndings in the previous section, we explain howto build a KMC simulation tool to model the charge tunnelingdynamics in NP networks. We also explain how to conﬁgure thenetwork to mimic Boolean logic gates. In the main part of thisproject we focus on the six fundamental Boolean logic gatesAND, OR, XOR, NAND, NOR, and XNOR. However we alsoshow in Supplementary Figure S4 and argue in SupplementarySection S4 that our networks are able to function as any of the16 two-input Boolean logic functions. In the last part we deﬁnethe ﬁtness value as a way to evaluate the quality of the networkbehaving as a particular Boolean logic gate. Based on this qualityfactor we derive QNDR and QNLS as new quantities to measure thepropertiesofnegativedifferentialresistance(NDR)andnonlinear separability (NLS).

                2.2.1 Kinetic Monte Carlo methodFor a given network topology of NNP nanoparticles, initializedcapacitance matrix C and set of electrode voltages UE, we ﬁrstlyinitialize the network’s state ⃗q  ⃗0 and potential landscape ⃗ϕ  ⃗0.Then for all possible tunneling events we calculate the change in freeenergy by Eqs 4, 5 and tunnel rates by Eq. 6.In the next step we compute the cumulative distributionfunction (CDF) of all tunnel rates CDFΓ(n). The CDF consists ofNT steps, one for each charge tunneling event n with its last stepCDFΓ(n = NT) as the total rate constant ktot. Now, for the KMCprocedure we ﬁrst need to sample two random numbers x1 and x2and ﬁnd n where

As n was selected, we execute its corresponding charge tunnelingevent from NP i to NP j. This will leave the current state ⃗q(t1)towards ⃗q(t2). Afterwards we update the time scale
Since only two elements of the state vector have been updated,for the next potential landscape we can just evaluate
where ⃗j is a vector including zeros and elementary charge −e atposition i and +e at position j. Figure 2 shows an overview of theKMC procedure. We implemented the simulation tool in Pythonusing NumPy (Harris et al., 2020) and Numba (Lam et al., 2015) forfast array-based computations (for NanoNets GitHub see (Mensing,2023)). The process of updating potentials and selecting the nextevent from the sorted CDF is achieved in about O (log(N)). However,since the whole system is coupled via the potential landscape, wehave to calculate all tunnel rates after each tunneling event, thuschanged potential also landscape. This leads to a time complexity ofabout O(N). Figure 2 shows the process time for the major parts inthe KMC procedure.

                2.2.2 Computing functionalitiesIn this paper we want to investigate computing functionalities inthe form of Boolean logic gates as a systematic property of the NPnetwork. For Boolean logic we need two inputs and one output.Inputs, either set on/1 or off/0, produce an output signal dependingon the underlying logic operation.In our case, two electrodes will always serve as input electrodes.These electrodes are set to UI ∈{0.0, 10.0} mV. Accordingly, there isan output electrode, which is always grounded, thus UO = 0.0 V. Atthe output we will measure the electric current

It enters the time t passed in the KMC procedure and the number ofelementary charge jumps from network to output NNet→O and fromoutput to network NO→Net. All other electrodes are called controlelectrodes with voltages set inside a range of UC ∈[−50.0, 50.0] mV.The system’s phase space is spanned by NC electrodes with eachpoint in phase representing a set of four different electric currents(I00, I10, I01, I11) corresponding to the four possible input electrodevoltage combinations.When increasing the network size, the electrode voltages dropacross an increasing amount of NPs. To ensure comparable results, wescale the voltages of control and input electrodes to prevent the electriccurrent at the output electrode from simply converging to zero as thenetwork expands. To achieve this, we conducted simulations to assessthe dependencies between input electrode voltage and output electrodeelectric current (I-V curves) across multiple systems. Through thisanalysis, we derived a scaling factor that maintains the electric current ata consistent level when multiplied by the initial voltage value, seeSupplementary Section S3; Supplementary Figure S3.Summarizing the simulation procedure, we ﬁrst initialize anetwork of regular grid-like topology, electrode positions andelectrostatics. Then we apply constant voltages to all electrodesand evolve the system into its equilibrium state. Afterwards, we startto track the times and the number of charge jumps exiting andentering the system via the grounded output electrode. This allows
us to compute the electric current I and its relative uncertainty uI.The simulation ends when the KMC procedure reaches uI = 5%uncertainty or when ten million charge tunneling events havebeen executed.

                2.2.3 Analysis methodsFor a single simulation run, we sample 20,000 different controlcombinations, resulting in a set of four electric currents (I00, I10, I01,I11) for each combination, totaling 80,000 currents. To characterizenonlinear properties we introduce the three parameters

(11)
Ml/Mr signify the increase in output current upon altering theﬁrst/second input voltage, whereas X quantiﬁes the cross-correlationbetween the two input voltages. In qualitative terms, Ml and Mr canbe interpreted as an effective mobility of the output currentconcerning one of the two input voltages, while X denotes ameasure of nonlinear coupling between both inputs.Our objective is to evaluate the network’s ability to be conﬁguredinto each Boolean logic gate using the ﬁtness function
as a quality metric for the accuracy with which a given set of currents(I00, I10, I01, I11) represents a speciﬁc gate (Bose et al., 2015). The ﬁtnesscomprises the slope or signal m, the mean squared error or noise MSE,and the absolute offset |c|. The signal is deﬁned as m  Ion −Ioff i∈ONIi|ON| −j∈OFFIj|OFF| where ON/OFF represents the set of electric currents corresponding to the gate’s on/off currents, and |ON|/|OFF| is thecardinality. For example, for an AND gate, ON = {I11} and OFF = {I00,I10, I01}. The noise is deﬁned as MSE  14 [i∈ON(Ii −Ion)2 + j∈OFF(Ij −Ioff)2] and the offset as c = Ioff. In total, the ﬁtness consists of a signal-to-noise ratio where logic gates with small offsets aremore favourable from the experimental perspective as expressed by δ >0. Theoretically it is easier to choose δ = 0. In Supplementary SectionS6; Supplementary Figure S6 we cover the inﬂuence of δ > 0. Speciﬁcrealisations of the four electric current values for a range of differentﬁtness values are shown in Supplementary Figure S4.For δ = 0 we can exactly rewrite Eq. 12 for the individual gates inform of the quantities introduced in Eq. 11
Our goal is to estimate the ﬁrst and second moment of theﬁtness distribution for each gate in terms of the statistical propertiesof Ml, Mr, and X. For this purpose we use two approximations:
Firstly, we approximate < F(x) > by F (< x >) and, secondly, weneglect cov (Ml, X) and cov (Mr, X). Both terms are negligiblerelative to cov (Ml, Mr), as demonstrated in Supplementary SectionS7; Supplementary Figure S7. Furthermore, since we only considerregular grid-like networks with a symmetric electrode connection,we naturally have 〈X〉= 0 as well as identical distributions for Mland Mr when averaging over a sufﬁciently larger number of controlvoltages. Therefore, we may abbreviate < Ml >  < Mr >  < M >and < M2l >  < M2r >  < M2 > .Using these approximations, for the AND, OR, NAND, andNOR gates we can write
(14)
and for the XOR and XNOR gates
Nonlinear behavior is in particular relevant for the NAND,NOR, XOR, and XNOR gates. For these gates we want to deﬁnemeasures which reﬂect the likelihood to ﬁnd gates with sufﬁcientlyhigh ﬁtness. For the NAND/NOR gates we consider the ratio< FNAND/NOR > /Var(FNAND/NOR). Both, if < FNAND/NOR > is nottoo negative and/or the standard deviationVar(FNAND/NOR)issufﬁciently large, there is a higher probability that positive ﬁtnessvalues occur, i.e., the system starts to display the respectivefunctionality. On this basis we deﬁne
(16)
In the last step we have neglected the Pearson correlationbetween Ml and Mr.The properties of the tanh-function mathematically restrictQNDR to values between 0 and 1. Since 〈M〉is always positive,the actual upper bound is 0.5. For values of QNDR close to zero,the possibility of NAND and NOR gates is very small.Qualitatively, this measure allows us to assess the nonlinearfeature of NDR required to achieve NAND/NOR gates.A second statistical access to Eq. 16 is based on the fact thatexactly for negative M NDR becomes visible in the input-outputdependence. Therefore, when sampling many M values withcorrespondingprobabilitydensityp(M),theintegral0−∞dM p(M) denotes the probability to ﬁnd a realization withNDR. As in general p(M) may be complicated, we aimed to ﬁnd afunction QNDR, which should recover essential properties of thisintegral and thus can also serve as a measure for the ability of thesystem to show NDR. The following conditions should be fulﬁlled:
(1) QNDR only depends on the ﬁrst moment 〈M〉and the standarddeviation σ(M), (2) for 〈M〉≠0 and σ(M) →0 the function QNDRapproaches one or 0, depending on the sign of 〈M〉, (3) forσ(M) →∞the function QNDR approaches 0.5, (4) for ﬁxed σ(M)the function QNDR decreases for increasing 〈M〉and vice versa.Beyond these limiting cases, one may additionally require that for aGaussian distribution with |〈M〉|≪σ(M) one reproduces the exactresult 0−∞dM p(M) ≈0.5 · [1 −c〈M〉/σ(M)] with c 2/π√. Inorder to avoid the use of transcendent numbers in our deﬁnition ofQNDR we approximate this result by choosing c = 1. Naturally, thereis not a unique choice of QNDR, fulﬁlling all conditions, but ourchoice in Eq 16 is probably one of the most simplest ones.We mention in passing that the variance in Eq. 14 becomes largerfor stronger correlations between Ml and Mr. This increases theprobability to ﬁnd gates (AND, OR, NAND, NOR) with higherﬁtness values.From Eq. 15 we may conclude that XOR and XNOR gates havethe same statistical properties. Since in this case the likelihood to ﬁndwell-performing exclusive gates with high ﬁtness values is directlyrelated to the size of the variance of the ﬁtness distribution, wecan introduce
as a general measure for nonlinear separability (NLS), stronglyreﬂecting the size of the nonlinear coupling X between both inputs.In Supplementary Section S5, we generalize the approachdescribed in this section towards systems of arbitrary numbers ofinputs. However, for the sake of simplicity and as this work onlycovers two-input devices we will stick to the quantities of Eqs11, 16, 17.

        3 Results

In our study of nanoparticle networks manipulated bysurrounding electrodes, key design features include the numberof nanoparticles (NNP) and the location and quantity of controlelectrodes (NC). Although we ﬁnd any possible two-input Booleanlogic function in the sampled phase space (see SupplementarySection S4), here we just focus on the six major Boolean logicgates AND, OR, XOR, NAND, NOR, and XNOR. In this section, weﬁrst analyze the dependence of logic gate ﬁtness (F) on the locationand number of control electrodes. Given the signiﬁcant impact ofelectrode positioning, the subsequent section addresses an increasein system size while considering two distinct electrode positioningsetups. All results are contextualized within the framework ofnonlinearproperties.Additionalinsightsintoparameterdependence on NNP and NC can be found in SupplementarySection S7; Supplementary Figure S8.
3.1 Number and positioning of controlelectrodes
In this section, we explore the impact of the number of controlelectrodes and their positioning on network functionality, focusingon regular grid-like networks as discussed in Section 2.1.1. We use a
7 × 7 grid of NPs (NNP = 49) with one output and two inputelectrodes. To ensure that the majority of the system resides betweeninput and output, we connect the output to a corner NP, and bothinputs to the opposite edges.We start by adding control electrodes near both inputs as we movecloser to the output. These simulations are denoted ANC, where NCrepresents the number of controls. Subsequently, controls are removedfrom the system, starting with those near both inputs. These simulationsare denoted BNC. The upper sketches in Figure 3 illustrate these simulatedsystems. This procedure allows us to study the effect on networkfunctionality for varying control numbers and control positioning.Foreachnetwork,wesample20,000controlvoltagecombinations, producing 20,000 sets of electric currents (I00, I10,I01, I11) using KMC. Utilizing Eq. 12, we calculate the ﬁtness of eachcontrol voltage combination for each Boolean logic gate at δ = 0. Theﬁtness distributions for each gate across different networks aredepicted as box plots in Figure 3A, providing insights into therelationshipbetweenfunctionalityandnumberofcontrolelectrodes.First, in agreement with theoretical expectation, see Eqs 14, 15,we observe similar distributions for the respective AND/OR,NAND/NOR,andXOR/XNORpairs.Furthermore,thedistributions of the ﬁrst two pairs are just mirror images of eachother. Any remaining variations in < F > and Var(F) within a paircan be attributed to covariance values between Mi and X, which wedid not consider in Eqs 14, 15.The impact on ﬁtness when altering the number or position ofcontrol electrodes is signiﬁcantly pronounced. We observe the mostdramatic effect for controls in close proximity to the outputelectrode. The measures of nonlinear behavior, i.e., QNDR andQNLS, exhibit much larger values, see Figure 3B. Theoretically,oneexpectsastrongcorrelationbetweenQNDRandtheavailability of high-ﬁtness NAND/NOR gates as well as betweenQNLS and the number of exclusive gates XOR/XNOR. Indeed, asseen from the box plots, a signiﬁcant correlation is indeed observed.As a secondary effect, it turns out to be helpful to use themaximum number of control electrodes NC = 9. Only in the case ofAND/OR gates, a reduction in the number of controls generallyleads to an increase in average ﬁtness, while retaining electrodes nearthe output results in the most signiﬁcant second moment.Moreover, we observe a strong impact on the correlationcoefﬁcientbetweenMlandMr.Thepresenceofcontrolelectrodes adjacent to the output electrode as well as an increasein the number of control electrodes signiﬁcantly reduces thiscorrelation, going along with a stronger independence of I01 and I10.As the results in Figure 3 suggest a substantial impact of thepositioning of controls relative to the output or inputs, weperformed two additional simulations for a network of size 7 × 7as skechted in Figure 4A. First, we randomly adjusted the voltages ofall seven electrodes and determined the resulting correlationbetween individual voltages and the output current. The Pearsoncorrelations are illustrated in Figure 4B. In alignment with previousobservations, electrodes in close proximity to the output electrode(speciﬁcally E5/E6) exhibit a strong impact via notable correlationsbetween electrode voltages and output electric current I. Thisobservationisfurthersupportedbythecurrent-voltagedependencies,whicharestrongestwhenalteringelectrodevoltages near the output (see Supplementary Figure S2).
In Supplementary Section S8; Supplementary Figure S9 wefurther study the charge tunneling behavior in a 1D system ofNPs in two control electrode conﬁgurations. The ﬁrst attaches thecontrol electrode in the middle of the 1D string while the secondattaches the control electrode in close proximity to the output. In thesecond setup we detect much stronger variation in the inputelectrode voltage regime associated to the Coulomb Blockade.Here we argue, that electrodes in close proximity to the outputcontribute most to the overall tunability of the network’sfunctionality as those electrodes primarily contribute to themanipulation of the potential landscape at the output region.Second, we selected inputs at all possible electrode combinations(Ei, Ej) and sampled multiple control voltage combinations for anypossible input electrode voltage combination {(Ei, Ej), (Ei + Δ, Ej), (Ei,Ej + Δ), (Ei + Δ, Ej + Δ)} with Δ = 10 mV. Figures 4C, D depict thenonlinear features of NDR and NLS, respectively, for each input
position combination. If a single input is positioned adjacent to theoutput at E5 or E6, NLS is lost entirely due to the strong correlationwith the electric current. For either NDR or NLS, optimal results areachieved by breaking symmetry and attaching one electrode at thecorner opposite to the output electrode at position E0, with the secondinput placed elsewhere. In fact, there is not a signiﬁcant difference inattaching the second input at E1, E2, E3, or E4. The advantage of havingan asymmetric electrode connection may indicate a potentialfunctionality gain for disordered networks in general.

            3.2 System size

In this section, we investigate the inﬂuence of system size on thenetwork functionality of regular grid-like NP networks. Followingthe experimental device proposed in (Bose et al., 2015), each
network is surrounded by a conﬁguration of eight electrodes. Weconnect the output to one corner of the network, and both inputs tothe opposite edges to ensure that most NPs are between the inputand output. This leaves ﬁve control electrodes to be attached at theremaining corners or edges.Considering the strong relation to electrode positioningindicated in the previous section, we distinguish between twosetups, as displayed in Figure 5A. In Setup A, we maintainconsistent relative distances between all electrodes, connectingthem either to a network corner or to the center of a networkedge. In Setup B, the two electrodes, adjacent to the output, keep thisminimum distance independent of system size.Each simulation covers a speciﬁc system size, ranging from a 3 × 3grid of NPs (NNP = 9) to a 16 × 16 grid of NPs (NNP = 256). We conduct20,000 simulations for each system size, sampling control voltagecombinations and producing sets of electric currents (I00, I10, I01, I11).In Figure 5B, we break down the ﬁtness into its key nonlinearcomponents: QNDR, QNLS, and corr (Ml, Mr). There is a noticeabledifference between both setups. In Setup B, a saturation behavior isobserved for each nonlinear component. For NNP > 100, maximumNDR and NLS are achieved, and both inputs start to become fullyindependent. In fact, QNDR even reaches its theoretical upper boundQNDR = 0.5 as described in Section 2.2.3. In contrast, Setup A showsa less pronounced dependence. For systems seeking nonlinearseparability, those with more than 50 NPs are not preferred.There is a decline in performance for increasing numbers of NPs,suggesting that smaller systems tend to perform better in terms ofnonlinear features, provided there is a minimum of about 16 NPs.Regarding the correlation between both mobility values Ml and Mr,we observe that independence between input electrodes is neverachieved, with corr (Ml, Mr) ≈0.5 for all networks. As shown inSupplementary Section S6; Supplementary Figure S5 the ﬁtnessdistributions for AND, NAND, and XOR follow the same trend.Similar to the ﬁndings in the previous section, we observe thatcontrol electrodes in close proximity to the output electrode playa pivotal role in overall network functionalities, particularly interms of nonlinearity. As the system size increases in Setup A, the
distance between the output and its closest control electrodes alsoincreases, leading to a negative impact on performance. Despiteachieving better results in larger systems with Setup B, it is crucialto note that in practical experiments, the network conﬁgurationmay not resemble Setup B. Therefore, we argue that inexperiments,oneshouldbecautiousaboutmakingthenetwork too large, even though theoretically, saturation innonlinearity should occur. Optimal results are obtained whenaiming for a maximum of about NNP = 100, especially ifelectrodes can be densely packed. Otherwise, even a smallersystem may prove to be more beneﬁcial.It is noteworthy that the saturation observed in Figure 5 occurs only for δ = 0, as QNDR and QNLS have been derived underthis assumption (see Section 2.2.3). For larger values of δ,indicating a contribution of the logic gates offsets to theﬁtness value, we deviate from the saturation behavior, showinga clear maximum in ﬁtness at about NNP = 100. Considering thepreference for logic gates without an offset in the experimentalsetup, this observation further supports the identiﬁcation of anoptimal system size at or below 100 NPs.

        4 Conclusion

We have developed a versatile and efﬁcient kinetic Monte Carlosimulation tool designed to model charge tunneling dynamics in NPnetworks. Building upon established concepts of single electronics,the model has been speciﬁcally tailored for NP networks. The toolallows for the investigation of larger networks, comprising hundredsof NPs, within reasonable processing times.Within our simulation framework, electrodes can be connectedto the network at arbitrary positions and designated as input, output,or control electrodes. We have successfully mapped Boolean logicgate functionality to the dependence between input and outputelectrodes. Adjusting the control electrode voltages, the chargetunneling dynamics is manipulated, enabling the same networkto be conﬁgured into any desired logic gate.
We assessed the quality of the network in functioning as a logicgate through a ﬁtness function. Increasing the number of controlelectrodes consistently enhances ﬁtness, with controls in closeproximity to the output electrode proving most pivotal. Whenalteringthepositionsofinputsandcontrols,ourresultsdemonstrated a loss of functionality when inputs are positionedin close proximity to the output. Additionally, we observed that anasymmetric connection of inputs could be advantageous.We further related the ﬁtness of each logic gate to a novel set ofvariables, enabling the derivation of measurement tools for keyqualitative nonlinear features such as negative differential resistanceand nonlinear separability. These features, while essential forBoolean logic, also hold relevance for other classiﬁcation ormachine learning functionalities.Upon increasing the network’s size, we unveil optimal nonlinearproperties for a minimum of about 100 nanoparticles. However, thissaturation needs electrodes to remain close to the network’s output. Ifan increase in size is accompanied by an enlargement of the areabetween the output and its neighboring electrodes, a clear maximum isachieved below 100 nanoparticles. The same holds true when the logicgate offset is also considered in the ﬁtness. In this context, we argue thatsmaller networks, 100 nanoparticles at maximum, are advantageous inexperimental setup where ensuring the correct electrode connectiondistance (i.e., nanoparticles in between) may be challenging.The results in this work describe the impact of constant voltagesignals on the network response. An important next step involvestime-varying signals, aligning the input time scales with the intrinsictime scales of the network states. This should allow us to explorememory effects, interpreting the network as a dynamical system dueto its recurrent connection topology. Subsequently, the potentialapplication of reservoir computing allow us to utilize NP networksfor temporal signal processing, encompassing tasks such as timeseries forecasting and approximating not only functions, as Booleanlogic, but also dynamical systems.Given the ﬁndings of this work on the inﬂuence of disorder andasymmetry, the study of disordered network topologies or variableNP sizes, resistances or materials may also provide new interestingfacets of brain-inspired applications.

        Data availability statement

The raw data supporting the conclusion of this article will bemade available by the authors, without undue reservation.

        Author contributions

JM: Conceptualization, Formal Analysis, Investigation,Methodology, Validation, Writing–review and editing, Data
curation,Software,Visualization,Writing–originaldraft.WW:Investigation,Methodology,Writing–reviewandediting,Fundingacquisition,Projectadministration,Resources.AH:Fundingacquisition,Investigation,Methodology,Projectadministration,Resources,Writing–reviewandediting,Conceptualization,FormalAnalysis, Supervision, Validation.

        Funding

The author(s) declare ﬁnancial support was received for theresearch, authorship, and/or publication of this article. This workwasfundedbytheDeutscheForschungsgemeinschaft(DFG,German Research Foundation) through project 433682494–SFB 1459.

        Acknowledgments

We are grateful for helpful discussions with M. Beuel, P. A.Bobbert, M. Gnutzmann, B. J. Ravoo, L. Schlichter, H. Tertilt, and E.Wonisch about the topic of this paper.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in theabsence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that couldbe construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.The author(s) declared that they were an editorial boardmemberofFrontiers,atthetimeofsubmission.Thishad no impact on the peer review process and the ﬁnaldecision.

        Publisher’s note

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authorsanddonotnecessarilyrepresentthoseoftheirafﬁliatedorganizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and thereviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, orclaim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed orendorsed by the publisher.

        Supplementary material

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found onlineat: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnano.2024.1364985/full#supplementary-material
